README.md, before:

# QTPy-Knob

QT Py USB Media Knob using rotary encoder &amp; neopixel
ring. Modified to use 15 mm shaft length encoder.

<img width=400 src="./docs/qtpyknob-pic1.jpg" />


The QTPy-Knob features:
- Media knob for volume up/down/mute with "qtpy-knob.py" CircuitPython program
- Stylish design reminiscent of Griffin Powermate
- Recessed USB-C connector to for safety
- No screws needed for assembly
- Only 3 wires needed to solder (none if you want to forgo LED lighting)
- Reprogrammable for any USB macro key action via CircuitPython

A small video about it: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pt7JgoSlgOg

This is an attempt to make a minimal and easy-to-build version of
similar, previous projects like:

- https://learn.adafruit.com/trinket-usb-volume-knob

- https://learn.adafruit.com/media-dial

## Components

Parts needed:

- [Adafruit QT
  Py](https://elmwoodelectronics.ca/products/adafruit-qt-py-samd21-dev-board-with-stemma-qt)
  (https://www.adafruit.com/product/4600). A [Seeeduino
  XIAO](https://www.seeedstudio.com/Seeeduino-XIAO-Arduino-Microcontroller-SAMD21-Cortex-M0+-p-4426.html)
  will also work.
  
- [NeoPixel Ring - 16 x WS2812 5050 RGB
  LED](https://elmwoodelectronics.ca/products/neopixel-ring-16-x-ws2812-5050-rgb-led-with-integrated-drivers)
  (https://www.adafruit.com/product/1463)
  
- [Rotary
  Encoder](https://elmwoodelectronics.ca/products/rotary-encoder-extras)
  (https://www.adafruit.com/product/377, PEC11-4215F-S24 or
  equivalent)
  
- 3D printed enclosure (see "cad" folder)

Optional:

- [Little Rubber Bumper
  Feet](https://elmwoodelectronics.ca/products/little-rubber-bumper-feet-pack-of-4)
  (https://www.adafruit.com/product/550 or equivalent). Helps the
  device stay in place on the desk.

## Software

Software installation consists of:

- Install CircuitPython on the QT Py

- Install required CircuitPython libraries to QT Py

- Copy qtpy_knob.py to QT Py

The CircuitPython installation step is described here: https://learn.adafruit.com/welcome-to-circuitpython/installing-circuitpython

The last two steps can be accomplished with the below

    git clone https://github.com/todbot/qtpy-knob
    cd qtpy-knob
    pip3 install circup
    circup install -r requirements.txt
    cp qtpy_knob.py /Volumes/CIRCUITPY/code.py

### Variations

There are a few variations of the code provided:

- `qtpy_knob_scroller.py` -- performs scrolling instead of volume knob

- `qtpy_knob_simple.py` -- no neopixel stuff, just encoder and USB sending

- `qtpy_knob_midi_cc.py` -- sends MIDI CC instead of keyboard/mouse

## Assembly

Steps:

1. Plug rotary encoder to bottom of QT Py. If your encoder has metal
on the bottom, add a bit of tape (Kapton, Scotch, electrical) in
between the QT Py and the encoder.  If your encoder has mounting tabs,
cut them off.  Solder the five pins:

  - 3 pins go in A1, A2, A3
  - 2 pins go in M0 and GND

  <img width=325 src="./docs/qtpyknob-tape.jpg"/><img width=325 src="./docs/qtpyknob-solder.jpg"/>


2. Print out the enclosure on your 3d printer. Standard 0.2mm at 20%
  infill is fine. Make sure to use the `mod` versions of the knob and
  diffuser STLs: the others don't fit this encoder. The STL files are:

  - `qtpyknob-base.stl` -- Base that houses the QT Py & rotary encoder
  - `qtpyknob-basecap.stl` -- Cap that goes on the bottom of the base
  - `qtpyknob-knob-mod.stl` -- Knob that you turn
  - `qtpyknob-diffuser-mod.stl` -- Light diffuser that goes between base
  & knob, should be printed with translucent or clear plastic. Or you
  can leave it out. Or you can approximate it with a disk cut out
  clear plastic like a CD case. 

Use the rotary encoder's washer & screw to hold QTPy+encoder assembly

  <img width=325 src="./docs/qtpyknob-case.jpg"/>


3. Solder three wires to the Neopixel ring, insert the ring into the enclosure and solder the wires to the 3V, Gnd, and MI pins of the QT Py.  Use a bit of hot glue to secure the Neopixel ring if it doesn't snap in.

  <img width=325 src="./docs/qtpyknob-wiring1.jpg"/>

4. Snap the bottom cap on and the knob top on and you're done with physical assembly!

  <img width=400 src="./docs/qtpyknob-pic1.jpg" />


### Wiring diagram

<img width=500 src="./docs/qtpyknob-wiring-diag.jpg" />


### Assembly animation

<img width=500 src="./docs/qtpyknob-cad-animation.gif" />



## Useful links

Resources that helped me out on this:

- https://learn.adafruit.com/media-dial
- https://learn.adafruit.com/make-it-a-keyboard/circuitpython
- https://github.com/adafruit/Adafruit_CircuitPython_HID/tree/master/examples
- https://circuitpython.readthedocs.io/projects/hid/en/latest/api.html#adafruit-hid-consumer-control-consumercontrol
- https://learn.adafruit.com/trinket-usb-volume-knob

Original blog post by the designer: [QTPy-knob: Simple USB knob w/ CircuitPython – todbot blog](https://todbot.com/blog/2021/02/25/qtpy-knob-simple-usb-knob-w-circuitpython/)

Commit message:

added descriptions of 3mf project files

README.md, after:

# QTPy-Knob

QT Py USB Media Knob using rotary encoder &amp; neopixel
ring. Modified to use 15 mm shaft length encoder.

<img width=400 src="./docs/qtpyknob-pic1.jpg" />


The QTPy-Knob features:
- Media knob for volume up/down/mute with "qtpy-knob.py" CircuitPython program
- Stylish design reminiscent of Griffin Powermate
- Recessed USB-C connector to for safety
- No screws needed for assembly
- Only 3 wires needed to solder (none if you want to forgo LED lighting)
- Reprogrammable for any USB macro key action via CircuitPython

A small video about it: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pt7JgoSlgOg

This is an attempt to make a minimal and easy-to-build version of
similar, previous projects like:

- https://learn.adafruit.com/trinket-usb-volume-knob

- https://learn.adafruit.com/media-dial

## Components

Parts needed:

- [Adafruit QT
  Py](https://elmwoodelectronics.ca/products/adafruit-qt-py-samd21-dev-board-with-stemma-qt)
  (https://www.adafruit.com/product/4600). A [Seeeduino
  XIAO](https://www.seeedstudio.com/Seeeduino-XIAO-Arduino-Microcontroller-SAMD21-Cortex-M0+-p-4426.html)
  will also work.
  
- [NeoPixel Ring - 16 x WS2812 5050 RGB
  LED](https://elmwoodelectronics.ca/products/neopixel-ring-16-x-ws2812-5050-rgb-led-with-integrated-drivers)
  (https://www.adafruit.com/product/1463)
  
- [Rotary
  Encoder](https://elmwoodelectronics.ca/products/rotary-encoder-extras)
  (https://www.adafruit.com/product/377, PEC11-4215F-S24 or
  equivalent)
  
- 3D printed enclosure (see "cad" folder). There are now 3mf project files which should work with most slicing software:

  1. **qtpyknob-all-mod.3mf** - all the parts, for printing in a translucent material
  2. **qtpyknob-diffuser-mod.3mf** - just the diffuser, for printing in a translucent material
  3. **qtpyknob-except-diffuser-mod.3mf** - all the other parts, if you want to print the body in an opaque material

Optional:

- [Little Rubber Bumper
  Feet](https://elmwoodelectronics.ca/products/little-rubber-bumper-feet-pack-of-4)
  (https://www.adafruit.com/product/550 or equivalent). Helps the
  device stay in place on the desk.

## Software

Software installation consists of:

- Install CircuitPython on the QT Py

- Install required CircuitPython libraries to QT Py

- Copy qtpy_knob.py to QT Py

The CircuitPython installation step is described here: https://learn.adafruit.com/welcome-to-circuitpython/installing-circuitpython

The last two steps can be accomplished with the below

    git clone https://github.com/todbot/qtpy-knob
    cd qtpy-knob
    pip3 install circup
    circup install -r requirements.txt
    cp qtpy_knob.py /Volumes/CIRCUITPY/code.py

### Variations

There are a few variations of the code provided:

- `qtpy_knob_scroller.py` -- performs scrolling instead of volume knob

- `qtpy_knob_simple.py` -- no neopixel stuff, just encoder and USB sending

- `qtpy_knob_midi_cc.py` -- sends MIDI CC instead of keyboard/mouse

## Assembly

Steps:

1. Plug rotary encoder to bottom of QT Py. If your encoder has metal
on the bottom, add a bit of tape (Kapton, Scotch, electrical) in
between the QT Py and the encoder.  If your encoder has mounting tabs,
cut them off.  Solder the five pins:

  - 3 pins go in A1, A2, A3
  - 2 pins go in M0 and GND

  <img width=325 src="./docs/qtpyknob-tape.jpg"/><img width=325 src="./docs/qtpyknob-solder.jpg"/>


2. Print out the enclosure on your 3d printer. Standard 0.2mm at 20%
  infill is fine. Make sure to use the `mod` versions of the knob and
  diffuser STLs: the others don't fit this encoder. The STL files are:

  - `qtpyknob-base.stl` -- Base that houses the QT Py & rotary encoder
  - `qtpyknob-basecap.stl` -- Cap that goes on the bottom of the base
  - `qtpyknob-knob-mod.stl` -- Knob that you turn
  - `qtpyknob-diffuser-mod.stl` -- Light diffuser that goes between base
  & knob, should be printed with translucent or clear plastic. Or you
  can leave it out. Or you can approximate it with a disk cut out
  clear plastic like a CD case. 

Use the rotary encoder's washer & screw to hold QTPy+encoder assembly

  <img width=325 src="./docs/qtpyknob-case.jpg"/>


3. Solder three wires to the Neopixel ring, insert the ring into the enclosure and solder the wires to the 3V, Gnd, and MI pins of the QT Py.  Use a bit of hot glue to secure the Neopixel ring if it doesn't snap in.

  <img width=325 src="./docs/qtpyknob-wiring1.jpg"/>

4. Snap the bottom cap on and the knob top on and you're done with physical assembly!

  <img width=400 src="./docs/qtpyknob-pic1.jpg" />


### Wiring diagram

<img width=500 src="./docs/qtpyknob-wiring-diag.jpg" />


### Assembly animation

<img width=500 src="./docs/qtpyknob-cad-animation.gif" />



## Useful links

Resources that helped me out on this:

- https://learn.adafruit.com/media-dial
- https://learn.adafruit.com/make-it-a-keyboard/circuitpython
- https://github.com/adafruit/Adafruit_CircuitPython_HID/tree/master/examples
- https://circuitpython.readthedocs.io/projects/hid/en/latest/api.html#adafruit-hid-consumer-control-consumercontrol
- https://learn.adafruit.com/trinket-usb-volume-knob

Original blog post by the designer: [QTPy-knob: Simple USB knob w/ CircuitPython – todbot blog](https://todbot.com/blog/2021/02/25/qtpy-knob-simple-usb-knob-w-circuitpython/)
